hi everyone my name is stefan and i am a
research software engineer at uh
research center julie in germany
and i work with psychoinformatics lab at
inm7 there
specifically with datalad and it's metal
meta data capabilities
and in today's educational course which
is titled how to write a re-executable
publication
i will be presenting part of that
and specifically the part that um
involves datalat
so i'm going to tell you what
is datalab and then i'll bring it back
to how that led can be used with
specific examples of of commands
um in order to build
or write a re-executable publication
so i'm going to tell you a story with
some illustrations and we start with it
with the team with the research team
it's a standard research team
and they've just been given this mandate
to make their data fair so that means
findable accessible interoperable and
reusable
and they have a team leader called nikki
and they have clinical scientists they
have psychologists they have
neuroscientists they have research
engineers
and they collaborate internationally and
they have data locally and they might
use data from elsewhere and they want to
make this process fair
and they also want to build
re-executable publications
now
um
these are the challenges
they
would like to understand how they can
structure their they have data
in different places they have a local
server they have hard drives with data
they have things that must still be
digitized and added as metadata
so they need to figure out
how to store their data do they need to
change that
but when it comes to structure as well
how do they structure their data is
different formats
different different data sets that's in
a specific hierarchy
and how are these data sets linked
and how are they transported if they
have data that's in the cloud or on the
server do they copy it before they
analyze it
um and then push it back copy the
results back and how do they track the
changes when they analyze this data so
can they revert easily back to the
previous version
if they realize oh we made a mistake
with this specific
analysis pipeline
so these are the challenges and they
they they search for a solution they
come across this product called data lab
so data is an um
open source tool it's a command line
tool and it's available for free and it
also has a python api
so you can install it on all the major
operating systems and and nikki and our
team
they do that
they install data lab
and now they want to start using data so
let's figure out what
do they want to do
now at the core of data set of data lab
we have a data data set
and this data set is a modular unit
um
that consists of a kit repository for
version controlling your file
content
everything that's part of a data set and
the data set is just files in a
directory tree
so your data data sequences of this this
git repository but also of the the annex
and this is managed by git annex and
the reason for splitting these up is to
make the data set itself
modular and small and lightweight but
can still represent the full
content of your data whereas the content
itself can then be stored in an annex
and this is used for large file storage
and management
and by separating these two
you make
the whole ecosystem more much more
extensible so you can for example
um put all of this lightweight data set
content oh sorry the lightweight data
set that describes the data in the in
the data
somewhere accessible that people can
find and they can understand what the
data looks like and what the
file tree looks like but the content can
be kept elsewhere such that
you can for example
um store it securely and encrypt
and behind access
control
but you can still keep the core uh part
of being able to track the changes to
your data
that this track changes is is based on
kit so if you're familiar with git data
does the same it just
adds a layer on top
um to make this
usable in a
data processing friendly or data
management friendly way and it has a
standard functionality of
with git you can create branches of your
data
you can add changes you can commit them
and merge them back such that you have a
new version and at the end of that
process you can just run a date to that
save in your command line and it creates
the exact state of the new version and
who committed that state and what
exactly changed
now this part opens up or datelet
specifically opens up your whole
process for decentralized collaboration
so
you do not have to depend on a central
data infrastructure
and manage everyone's
access to that and sometimes it could be
physical that people have to go to a
place in order to download it if safety
is such concern
or they can only process it there
the decentralized collaboration of kit
is now opened up for your data so if
nikki manages her data sets as data
layer data sets
she can decide that the git annex part
is pushed to the local server which
might have
have access to some network
but the data set the the data data set
part is then
made available on some public repository
for example github
and
in this way our colleague that's on the
opposite side of of
the globe
priya can clone the data set so it
clones the lightweight data set it
doesn't get all of the content
but it gets enough to be able to say
this is what the data
tree looks like these are all the
supposed files in the tree and when you
get down to a file you cannot open it
but it points to it's a symbolic link
that points to the actual data location
and data
ladd can
if you then run datelet get a specific
file data can get everything for you uh
under it it takes one takes charge of
the transportation mechanism it asks you
for access financial if you if it's
needed for example if
nikki provided access credentials to
priya to that specific server where the
data is located and she can enter those
and she will get the file that's
necessary
something else that deadline also does
is capturing dependencies and provenance
and what this means is something that's
very useful for our goal of creating a
reproducible
article or publication
now when you want to do something like
that is you often start with data input
data you then have an analysis pipeline
it could be a script
a shell script a python script it could
be a full containerized pipeline
that contains the full environment that
people would need to to run this
analysis
and then you end up with an output
output data
now with data you can
use data set nesting to capture these
dependencies so if you create a new data
set that is now called our publication
data set for example
i create a sub data set that
tracks
the the
changes or tracks the version of the
container that is a data set i i create
a sub data tracks the version of the
actual input data
and then i can run
the analysis and i use datalite1 to do
that because when i use daylight run and
i for example point to the input data
and to the container
the outputs that are generated
um
can also be saved as a sub data set in
the publication dataset but the
provenance record specifically is saved
so this means
and this province regularly is tied to a
specific run command
and that run command is tied to a
specific commit hash so deadline can
very
specifically identify
what which version of the code was run
on which version of the input data to
generate which version of the output
date
and then finally all of this new
content that was generated and that was
saved as a date lat data set can be
pushed again back to where
the original
input data for example was located so
say priya has done all of this on the
other side of the
globe
nikki can then update this data set so
say she cloned the publication data set
but originally only contained the input
data and nikki has added the container
and she's added the output data set
um
priyas has added all of those things and
nikki can now update this data set she
gets all the new content
uh specifically the data data set the
lightweight modular data sets not
necessarily the content
but she also gets the provenance record
of that run command that that prom
and nikki wants to specifically rerun
this she wants to make sure that it's
reproducible
for them locally because they need to
run into featuring it and and then she
just
takes that commit hash that points to
the province record she says datelet
rerun and generates the same output data
and these can be compared and be shown
to be reducible bit by bit
um data datalad is is
not
let's say a data management system that
replaces existing things it it's made
stronger by its integrations to existing
things so it integrates with all the
major uh code and then data hosting
services
uh amazon s3 dropbox a lot of us know
open euro here
open your data sets are data like data
sets you can clone
open your data sets and get the content
just purely with date lad um so so so
this means that people do not have to
read like like uproot the whole
infrastructure that they built um around
specific uh
server and data storage
processes
in order to use data they can just let
data integrate with that
and then finally we have some resources
here
and
specifically i want to point to the
datelite handbook which contains all of
what i've said just now but in much more
detail and much more carefully described
the way with walk through examples and
then and code that you can run and
examples of specific
data storage servers and services that
they'd let degress with
so have a look now getting back to the
publication
we have to do a lot of what i just
explained for building a re-executable
publication firstly we have to access
data
input data we have to run a specific
analysis with that input data
and then we can save the outputs and
push that somewhere such that other
people can re-execute that publication
so with accessing data we do a datalit
clone and here's for example a
pointer to it open your data set
so
the security repository lightweight and
clone it it gets all of the
the data set con not that it gets the
lightweight data set locally and then
you can point the specific file to get
it
that's an example
and then once you're finished the nice
thing about that you can just drop that
content as well so you don't have to
download the full data set then use a
part of it and that have all of this
extra data there you can just drop what
get what you need and drop it once
you're done
uh you have to generate results after
you have the data and in order to do
that if you specifically want to run a
containerized pipeline you have to have
a dateline extension called date light
container
and you install it with pep or conda
and then you also have to have the
container itself and there's an example
of a set of represent containers
where one of them will be used as a
pipeline to run on the input data
and the the command we use here is data
containers run and that captures
a run command provenance record
and once it's done
we can rerun that by using the commit
hash of that run command
and then also to publish data
we can publish data in multiple places
we can publish the the um
the lightweight repository on github so
that's done by saying data that light
creates sibling github
we call it for example kit lfs because
we want to publish the annex contents
and get lfs and gtlfs is a large file
storage it's a way to store large files
on github as opposed to the
[Music]
data storage on git itself which has as
a gap now the way to do that is to
create a special mode of of type git lfs
and this is done with kit annex
as an example command and we have a
walkthrough in the handbook that
specifically explains a bit more about
this that you can run through in detail
and then if that is created it's very
easy to copy the contents to git lfs and
to push the data data set together
with these commands but you can also
combine them so if you for example
create a publication dependency always
when we want to push to get up we also
want the falcon contest to go to the
annexed
location
then we make the github lfs
a dependency
of of pushing the github and this is the
way that it's done they let siblings
with the publish depends flag and then
finally just they'd let push to github
and that puts your data where it needs
to be and it puts your light weight
positive it needs to be
and that that kind of summarizes what we
need to do for re-executable application
and what you will be doing um
or similar steps that you will be doing
for this workshop
thank you